JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
ANTONIO MORA: And I'm Antonio
Mora.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: Such a meeting would be
fruitless,
and I want to go a different
route.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Border tensions
build.
As President Trump pushes to
build the wall,
Mexico's president cancels a
meeting at the
White House.
ANTONIO MORA: Also ahead this
Thursday, Judy
sits down with senior Trump
adviser Kellyanne
Conway to look at the
president's first week
in office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And aging out of
the middle
class, the second part of our
look at the
growing group of Americans
suddenly finding
themselves in financial straits.
TERESA GHILARDUCCI, The New
School for Social
Research: Over half of people
who are working
now and over 50 have nothing for
retirement
savings.
They will only have Social
Security to rely
on.
ANTONIO MORA: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
We're having guests join me here
at the "NewsHour"
anchor desk in the coming weeks.
Tonight, it's journalist Antonio
Mora.
Welcome, Antonio.
ANTONIO MORA: Thank you, Judy.
It's an honor to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're glad to
have you.
So, our top story tonight:
President Trump's
push for a wall on the border
with Mexico
has opened a diplomatic rift,
and it raises
the prospect of a major new tax.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: The president of Mexico
and myself
have agreed to cancel our
planned meeting
scheduled for next week.
LISA DESJARDINS: That was the
president's
version of events today.
Hours earlier, Mexican President
Enrique Pena
Nieto canceled his scheduled
visit to Washington.
He'd come under heavy political
pressure at
home after Mr. Trump signed an
executive order
on Wednesday to start work on a
border wall,
and insisted again that Mexico
will ultimately
pay for it.
Today, the president gave no
ground at the
congressional Republican retreat
in Philadelphia.
DONALD TRUMP: Unless Mexico is
going to treat
the United States fairly, with
respect, such
a meeting would be fruitless,
and I want to
go a different route.
We have no choice.
LISA DESJARDINS: He also
repeated calls to
bolster deportation forces and
eliminate refuges
for the undocumented.
DONALD TRUMP: From day one, I
have said it,
and I mean the immediate removal
of criminal
aliens.
They're going to be gone fast.
(APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: And, finally, at
long last cracking
down on sanctuary cities.
LISA DESJARDINS: Outside,
protesters swarmed
the area, opposing the
president's policies
on immigration and other issues.
But Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell
said Congress is prepared to
foot the bill
for building the border wall, at
least for
now.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: We
are moving ahead.
As the speaker pointed out to
our group yesterday,
with, roughly -- yes roughly $12
billion to
$15 billion.
So we intend to address the wall
issue ourselves.
And the president can deal with
his relations
with other countries on that
issue and other
issues.
LISA DESJARDINS: Later, en route
back to Washington,
White House spokesman Sean
Spicer said the
president wants a 20 percent tax
on all imports
from Mexico.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
By doing it that way, we can do
$10 billion
a year and easily pay for the
wall just through
that mechanism alone.
LISA DESJARDINS: But a short
time later, Spicer
said that's just one option.
At the same time, some
Republicans, like Illinois
Congressman Adam Kinzinger, say
the country
still needs a comprehensive
immigration policy.
REP.
ADAM KINZINGER (R), Illinois:
How do we fix
our immigration system so that
in 20, 30 years,
we're not back here again?
And how do we deal with the
folks that are
here?
You're not going to round up and
deport 15
million people.
You have to have some kind of a
pathway to
legalization.
LISA DESJARDINS: There's unease
with some
of President Trump's other
pronouncements
as well.
House Speaker Paul Ryan pushed
back today
against Mr. Trump's assertion to
ABC News
that torture works.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: And
torture is illegal.
And torture is not legal.
And we agree with it not being
legal.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mr. Trump did
say he'd defer
his CIA director and incoming
secretary of
defense, both of whom have said
they oppose
a return to water-boarding in
particular.
Meanwhile, Mr. Trump returned to
Washington
this afternoon, ending his first
day on Air
Force One.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us
now.
So, Lisa, what are the
Republican members
saying about this White House
talk of an import
tax on Mexican goods?
LISA DESJARDINS: First of all,
they are trying
to get their hands around
exactly what the
president is proposing here.
We hear from the House speaker's
office that
they believe this is a reference
to the plan
House Republicans laid out last
year called
the Border Adjustability Tax,
and something
I think we're going to talk a
lot about in
the coming months.
But, basically, it is a 20
percent tax not
just on Mexico, but basically on
all imports
into this country.
It would change dramatically how
this country
deals with imports and exports.
In affects almost every business
in this country,
a very big deal.
But Republicans now are trying
to parse out
whether the president is
specifically proposing
this, whether it's one idea.
Exactly what Sean Spicer meant
is still up
in the air at this hour.
But House Republicans are hoping
that the
president is full force behind
this plan.
They like it.
Not everyone does.
It's something that we're going
to have to
pay a lot of attention to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That is for sure.
So, Lisa, as you look back on
the two days
of this conference, what was
actually accomplished?
LISA DESJARDINS: Overall, Judy,
the bottom
line here is a timeline.
The House Republicans have laid
out, specifically
the House, a 200-day agenda.
And what does that mean?
That really means that, by
August, they want
to have in their hands concrete
proposals
for how they will replace
Obamacare and how
they will repeal the tax code.
Now, what does that mean?
Does that mean they will pass
something by
then?
No one's exactly clear.
But they want to have those
proposals in hand
by August, and Speaker Ryan
today said they
want everything passed by the
end of the year.
Those are ambitious goals.
The timeline is what we have.
We don't have the details of the
plans.
That's what they will be doing
for the next
coming months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, Lisa,
what are members,
one by one, what are they
telling you in terms
of whether they think that can
happen?
LISA DESJARDINS: There are some
nervous members,
because, in addition to these
very large plans,
Obamacare and tax reform, they
also have some
things that have tripped up
Republicans in
the past, like the debt ceiling,
which will
come due shortly, and also
another government
spending bill.
Those are things that
Republicans have had
trouble with in their own
conference and they
take a lot of time.
In addition, Judy, they do not
have 60 votes
in the Senate, and I have spoken
to several
Republicans today who say, we
need to be realistic
about that.
We can't push for everything we
want and expect
it, because we know that Senate
Democrats
are going to oppose us.
We have to be sober, in the
words of one Republican
I talked to today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
reporting
from the Republican
congressional retreat
there in Philadelphia, thank
you.
We will hear from a senior White
House adviser
right after the news summary.
ANTONIO MORA: In the day's other
news: Russia
warned President Trump to think
twice about
setting up safe zones for
refugees inside
Syria.
The president confirmed in his
ABC interview
that he favors the idea, but he
gave no specifics.
Today, a Kremlin spokesman
warned the U.S.
should thoroughly calculate all
possible consequences
before doing anything.
Meanwhile, rebels in Syria say
they want to
see action, not just words.
JUDY WOODRUFF: British Prime
Minister Theresa
May is talking up cooperation
with the new
Trump administration on her
first visit to
the U.S. as prime minister.
She addressed the Republican
retreat today
and drew parallels between the
GOP's victory
last November and Britain's vote
to leave
the European Union.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: As we
rediscover our confidence
together, as you
renew your nation, just as we
renew ours,
we have the opportunity, indeed
the responsibility,
to renew the special
relationship for this
new age.
We have the opportunity to lead
together again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: May is set to
meet with President
Trump at the White House
tomorrow.
ANTONIO MORA: Cheers erupted in
the West African
nation of Gambia today as the
new president
returned home, following a
political crisis.
President Adama Barrow was
welcomed by thousands
of supporters.
He had waited until longtime
ruler Yahya Jammeh
finally left, and West African
military forces
secured the country.
Barrow is Gambia's first new
president in
two decades.
He's promised to reverse
Jammeh's authoritarian
policies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Australia,
celebrations
and protests competed as the
country marked
Australia Day.
It's the anniversary of the
first British
colonists arriving in Sydney
Harbor in 1788.
Many Aborigines, though, now
call it Invasion
Day, and thousands protested in
major cities.
Some staged a sit-in at the
Parliament House
in Canberra.
ANTONIO MORA: Wall Street took a
bit of a
pause today, 24 hours after
reaching a major
milestone.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 32
points to close at 20100.
It cracked the 20000 barrier for
the first
time yesterday.
But the Nasdaq fell one point
today, and so
did the S&P 500.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Judy talks
to the president's senior
counselor, Kellyanne
Conway; what President Trump's
latest actions
on immigration mean for the
United States'
relationship with Mexico; also,
people who
appear middle class, but are on
the edge of
financial ruin; and much more.
Now for a view from inside the
White House
of the Trump administration's
first days in
office, I'm joined by Kellyanne
Conway, counselor
to the president.
Kellyanne Conway, welcome back
to the program.
I'm going to start with the fact
that this
administration is not even a
week old, and,
already, the president of Mexico
has canceled
a visit he was going to make
next week, saying
he's not going to pay for this
border wall.
Is this the way the president
wanted to have
a relationship between the U.S.
and Mexico
as his administration gets under
way?
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior
Adviser: As
President Trump said today in
Philadelphia
when he addressed the House
Senate Republican
Conference at their retreat,
Judy, it was
a mutual decision to postpone
this trip.
And I think that when these two
leaders are
ready to sit down and talk about
a wide range
of issues, they will do that.
But let's look at the rest of
the week.
I mean, this has been a pretty
remarkable
week in just four work days.
We have had wage-boosting,
job-creating measures.
We have had manufacturing CEOs
from all over
the country here, really premier
job creators,
hearkening the -- really heeding
the president's
call to try to have an explosion
in manufacturing
in our nation.
And then on the very same day,
we had the
labor union leaders, along with
laborers themselves
here at the White House, talking
about what
it means for them be a
carpenter, a pipe fitter,
a plumber, a steelworker, like
the many men
I grew up with in South Jersey
outside of
Philadelphia.
And they said that they had
never been invited
to the White House before,
Democratic or Republican.
They felt so included that
they're part of
the national conversation.
The president has issued
executive orders
withdrawing from the TPP, so
that we have
bilateral trade agreements in
the future that
benefit the United States and
its workers
and its allies and its
interests.
So, it's been a very busy week.
We're very happy to have our
first foreign
leader tomorrow, Prime Minister
Theresa May,
here, meeting with President
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Kellyanne,
let me -- if
I may interrupt.
(CROSSTALK)
KELLYANNE CONWAY: And we're very
happy about
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
I do want to ask you about some
of these things,
but sticking with the Mexico
story, because
the president of Mexico said it
was his decision
not to come.
But what I want to ask you about
is the border
wall and paying for it.
You had the White House press
secretary tell
reporters today that it was
going to be paid
for with a 20 percent tax
imposed on Mexican
goods coming into the U.S.
Now, later, the White House said
that was
just one idea.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it?
Which is it?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: That's right.
That is one of the many methods
by which to
pay for the wall.
It is one proposal on the table.
Certainly, there are others.
And, Judy, when you consider the
price tag
for this wall, which will be a
physical wall
constructed on the southern
border, let's
contrast that to the billions
and billions
that we spend on benefits for
and accommodating
illegal immigrants.
So, we -- this country spends
billions of
dollars protecting the borders
of other countries
around the world.
It's high time we start
protecting our own.
We're a sovereign nation.
And as President Trump has said
all along,
made a centerpiece of his
campaign from day
one, we have to stop the flow of
people and
drugs over our borders.
What he also did, by the way,
these executive
orders this week, in terms of
building the
wall, was, he has expanded the
tools and the
resources that our law
enforcement officials
and our brave men and women who
are protecting
that border.
They need tools and resources
and they should
be respected.
The detention areas will be
larger to accommodate
those and stop this catch and
release, stop
the sanctuary city funding.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If I can just
interrupt, because
-- and I hate to do that, but I
-- because
I have a number of things I want
to ask you
about.
We did report on all that last
night.
But the other thing the
president did yesterday,
in addition to make the
announcement you just
discussed, is he talked about
the sanctuary
cities, so-called sanctuary
cities, where
undocumented immigrants are
given a different,
a fairer treatment in the eyes
of many.
Today, we have seen 100 American
mayors say
they are not going to go along
with what the
president said.
With that kind of pushback, how
is the president
going to force these mayors, who
are saying
this is an inhumane way to treat
people who
are here in this country as
visitors?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: This issue of
sanctuary
cities goes to the heart of how
Donald Trump
himself has changed the whole
way many Americans
look at illegal immigration.
For years, the question of
fairness in illegal
immigration went to one issue:
What's fair
to the illegal immigrant?
And now people are asking,
what's fair to
the rest us of us?
What's fair to the American
worker?
What's fair to the safety and
sanctity of
people who live in some of these
sanctuary
cities?
What's fair to Kate Steinle?
That woman should be a household
name.
She should be known as a
national treasure,
this woman who was murdered in
cold blood
in front of her father in San
Francisco by
an illegal immigrant who had
been deported
five times, Judy.
That's humane treatment of whom?
Kate Steinle?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: No, and I hear
you.
And the president has spoken of
her often.
But how will the president force
mayors who
are saying they are going to
take care of
undocumented immigrants if they
come into
their cities, because, frankly,
they say the
idea that most immigrants are
committing crimes
is just not true?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, that is
not what the
president said.
You're -- now we're conflating
two different
things.
No one said that in terms of the
sanctuary
cities defunding.
The -- I guess those mayors will
have to find
money somewhere else, because
they love when
the money flows from the federal
government
here in Washington.
So, if they want to continue to
flout and
flagrantly violate the law and
brag about
it today publicly, then they
should go ahead.
But they're going to have it
find their own
money in doing so.
And perhaps if they are
violating the law,
then we will see what happens in
the future.
But...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: ... until then
-- you know,
but, Judy, this is -- I hear
undocumented
immigrants and I hear about say
-- again,
what is fair to everyone, the
people, the
legal people, the American
citizens who live
there, our law enforcement who
feels like
they don't have all the
resources and tools
they need, and then, of course,
our employment
base where people are saying...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm going to...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: People are
tired of hearing
that...
(CROSSTALK)
KELLYANNE CONWAY: ... here to do
the jobs
Americans don't want to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm going to
interrupt you
again.
I'm sorry.
I apologize for continuing to
interrupt, but
I do want to move on.
Syria, the president said in an
interview
yesterday he wants to create
safe zones for
the people living in Syria.
Wouldn't this require U.S.
troops?
And has he discussed it with the
senior national
security members of his
administration?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: He has
discussed Syria in
that regard with his national
security team.
But his national security and
intelligence
teams are being -- still being
formed, as
you know.
General Mattis will be, we hope,
confirmed
or sworn in -- excuse me --
sworn in on the
next day or so.
And, of course, we have
Secretary Kelly now
and the CIA director also.
But the thing is, he will meet
with them.
But he has been -- just
President Trump has
been very public about the fact
that Aleppo
is a humanitarian crisis that's
been all but
ignored by this country for far
long.
And he will meet with them and
he will make
final decisions, but he's been
very public,
including on a different network
last night,
Judy, about what options are
very much on
the table.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And -- but not
exactly in connection
with that, but the president has
also spoken
about the prospect of torture,
of enhanced
interrogation.
He said that it's something that
he likes.
We also saw yesterday, Kellyanne
Conway, a
draft executive order reported
on that raises
the prospect of reviving these
CIA so-called
black site prisons, where we
know terrorism
suspects were once detained and
tortured.
Now, I want to ask you about a
story in The
New York Times today, because
the press secretary,
Sean Spicer, said this is not --
this draft
order didn't come from the
United -- from
the White House.
But The New York Times quotes
three different
individuals who say that it did
come from
the White House, from the
National Security
Council office.
So, I guess my question is, why
doesn't the
White House simply acknowledge
that this is
where it came from?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Because it
didn't.
That is not an official White
House document,
period, as I have been told.
And if it came if it came from
the NSC, if
it came from others who are
leaking documents,
it certainly is not -- that is
not a White
House document that has been
discussed internally.
So, what the press secretary has
said is true,
as far as I have been briefed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, both...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: On the broader
issue of
torture, though, it's important,
because I
think you said that the
president said he
likes it.
What he said is that he has been
informed
by people very recently that it
is a possible
-- a possibility that works.
You have other people, like his
incoming secretary
of defense, who said that he
doesn't believe
it works, that there are other
tactics...
JUDY WOODRUFF: And both...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: ... that could
work just
as well.
So he will meet with his team
and make a final
decision on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And both the
defense secretary
and the CIA director said that
they had never
seen this draft order, until it
was reported
in the press.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, that's
why.
And if it were a White House
document, they
certainly would have, because
they are the
secretary of -- his secretary of
defense and
his CIA director.
So that helps answer the
question as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A few...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: We know there
are lots of
leaks everywhere.
There's nothing we can do about
that, except
not leak ourselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A very few quick
questions
I'm just going to ask you one
right after
the other.
This investigation into what the
president
calls widespread voter fraud, no
credible
evidence of this.
Has anyone on the White House
staff tried
to talk the president out of
doing this?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, I won't
reveal private
conversations with the
president, Judy, but
I will tell you that what the
president is
talking about is registration
and voter rolls.
He knows there are dead people
registered,
there are illegal people
registered, and he
wants to get to the bottom of
that without
an election on the horizon.
Usually, people get all
exercised about electoral
reform after something goes
wrong or ballot
integrity when we're about to
have an election.
So, it's great that, right after
a successful
election that he had, unexpected
to most in
the media, that he is looking at
ballot integrity,
one person, one vote, really the
bedrock of
our democracy.
And that's what he's talking
about.
I have discussed with him as
recently as today.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, pardon me.
If there's no evidence of
widespread voter
fraud, couldn't this end up just
like President
Trump's longtime claim that
President Obama
was born outside the United
States?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: No, I can't
imagine why
that would ever be raised on the
same plane.
But let me say this.
Were those same words used by
anyone to describe
Jill Stein and her fantasy of a
recount based
on -- quote -- "voter fraud"
that she detected
in Wisconsin and Michigan that
ended up getting
her millions of dollars in
taxpayer -- taxpayer
dollars and a lot of platform by
the media,
perhaps even on your network?
Somehow, that was a great idea
by Jill Stein
for 70,000 votes, because they
didn't want
to accept the election results
that they didn't
expect, and they wouldn't
accept.
So, I just have to say the
president is talking
about registration and voter
rolls.
And I don't think anybody can
deny that there
are people who are registered to
vote, there
are people registered to vote in
different
states, there are people who are
ineligible
to vote either because they're
dead and shouldn't
vote or they are illegal and
shouldn't be
registered to vote.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned the
media.
We know the president has been
engaged in,
I don't know of any other way to
put it, than
a long-running battle with the
media, has
been very critical of much, if
not most of
the news media.
And, today, in The New York
Times, it's running
a story, your colleague the
White House chief
strategist, Steve Bannon, said
-- told The
New York Times last night, he
said the media
is -- quote -- in his words,
"the opposition
party," and that it should --
quote -- "keep
its mouth shut and just listen
for a while."
Does the president share that
view?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, there
are other things
Steve Bannon said in that
interview in The
New York Times, very rare
interview.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what about
that quote?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, what --
what -- let's
talk about what he meant there.
What he is saying there is,
there's no evidence
that anybody in the media
learned anything
from this election.
There's no head that's rolled.
There's no division that said,
wow, we really
screwed this up by stating as
fact that Hillary
Clinton was going to win, and
that she was
going to take the House and the
Senate with
her.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in all
fairness, Kellyanne
Conway, most people we know in
the Republican
and Democratic parties looked at
the public
opinion polls, and thought that
that was going
to be the outcome.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, not in
the Trump campaign,
or we wouldn't have been sending
him to Michigan,
Wisconsin, certainly back to
North Carolina,
Pennsylvania.
I had him in Pennsylvania three
times a week.
So, we must have seen something
that allowed
to us influence the calendar
where we were
deploying our two greatest
assets, Mike Pence
and Donald Trump.
But, apart from that, there is
no evidence
that -- you know, we -- when I
look up at
the screen on most stations,
Judy -- and I'm
like the most open press person
here, I would
think -- I look up at the screen
and I see
no difference between the way
candidate Trump,
president-elect Trump, and
President Trump
is being treated by many
outlets.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, should the
media shut up
and listen for a while, as Steve
Bannon said?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: I think that
we should all
-- I think we should all learn
to listen more
to America.
And that's probably Steve
Bannon's central
pint, is that Donald Trump
proved that he
understood America in the way
that those who
say they're informing America
simply did not.
And it really takes listening.
I was a professional pollster
for 28 years.
My job was to listen to people
and take advice
from them.
Some of the best advice and
insights I have
ever received in my professional
life have
come from -- most of them have
come from people,
by listening to them, by getting
out of the
bubble, by getting out of our
coastal media
centers.
And this is just said with, you
know, a great
deal of -- I have tried on many
different
networks now -- it doesn't get
covered.
People cherry-pick one or two
words, but I
have tried many times now on
different networks
to say, I would like us to have
an open relationship
and a fair and free press.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: But with a
free press comes
a responsibility.
And that responsibility comes in
allowing
to us ask the questions, like
what are we
missing about America?
As I like to say, we, the Trump
administration,
and the media, are -- have to
co-parent this
country, have joint custody of
the country
for the next eight years
probably.
Let's find a way to mutually
coexist.
But calling the president names,
going on
Twitter and saying snarky things
about him,
the president of the United
States, that would
never pass editorial muster on a
network or
in the papers really should be
rethought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're --
it's a big,
big conversation.
And it's early in the
administration.
And I know we're going to have
opportunities
to come back to that.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: I'm happy to
have it with
you, Judy.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kellyanne Conway,
thanks.
ANTONIO MORA: Let's take a
closer look now
at the rift developing between
President Trump
and Mexico's Enrique Pena Nieto.
For what that might mean for
both countries,
I'm joined by Roger Noriega of
the American
Enterprise Institute.
He's a former assistant
secretary of state
for Western Hemisphere affairs
in the George
W. Bush administration.
And James Carafano, vice
president of the
Davis Institute for National
Security and
Foreign Policy at the Heritage
Foundation.
Very good to have you both here.
Roger, I want to start with you.
Was the cancellation of this
meeting, because
both leaders were backed into a
corner, Donald
Trump by his promises in the
campaign that
he was going to build that wall
and Mexico
was going to pay for it, and
Pena Nieto because
his approval ratings are so
terrible, that
he has to play hardball
politically?
ROGER NORIEGA, American
Enterprise Institute:
Well, I think it's fair to say
that this was
a very uncomfortable exchange
between these
two leaders.
Certainly, I think President
Trump didn't
want to be seen as having a
meeting canceled
on him, so he suggested that it
was a common
decision to maybe reschedule.
But, from the point of view of
Pena Nieto,
he -- you know, the insistence
that Mexico's
going to pay for a wall, in
spite of his declarations
to the contrary, put this very
weak president
on the defensive at home.
And, you know, this is our
second largest
trading partner.
This is a country we should be
cultivating
a positive dialogue about how we
work together
to make ourselves more secure
and more competitive
vis-a-vis the rest of the world.
ANTONIO MORA: And, James, did
Pena Nieto have
really any choice, after
President Trump tweeted
that the meeting had to be
canceled if Mexico
wasn't going to pay for the
wall?
JAMES CARAFANO, Heritage
Foundation: Yes,
I don't think it's just about
that tweet.
And I want to start by saying, I
think the
Mexican government actually
started out exactly
right, and not just what the
president has
said, but the whole the way the
campaign rhetoric
was portrayed.
That's what's being dumped into
Latin America.
They're not watching FOX News.
And, I mean, they're basically
hearing a very
vitriolic, very aggressive
description of
this.
ANTONIO MORA: But is there
really any side
in Mexico?
JAMES CARAFANO: Well, that's the
only side
that you hear in Mexico.
But, yet, the administration
started out wanting
to be open, be constructive, and
engaging
with the U.S. I think they did a
great job.
They sent every positive signal
that they
wanted to work with you, and...
ANTONIO MORA: But then now this.
JAMES CARAFANO: And the U.S. --
I think this
administration responded in
kind.
They were appreciative.
They were really looking forward
to this.
ANTONIO MORA: But the Mexican
foreign minister
came, and on the day the Mexican
came into the U.S., that tweet
went out.
You were involved in the
transition.
JAMES CARAFANO: Right.
ANTONIO MORA: Was there a
discussion of what
would happen if they got to this
impasse?
JAMES CARAFANO: Well, I didn't
-- I just don't
think we're at an impasse.
I think we're at a bump in the
road.
And here's why I think a bump in
the road.
At the end of the day, the
Mexican government
made the right call.
They want to work with the
United States,
and they do believe they can
work with this
administration.
And, as long as they're in
power...
ANTONIO MORA: So...
JAMES CARAFANO: Well, let me
finish.
I think they're committed to
that.
And here's the deal.
I think if they -- if the
administration actually
follows through on the plan --
and I'm not
talking about tweeting and
what's reported
in the media or anything else --
but the things
that Tillerson and Mattis and
Kelly talk about,
the things they want to do in
terms of securing
the border, which actually
benefits both sides,
and in terms of modernizing the
trade relationships,
which again benefits both sides,
at the end
of the day, it's going to be
good for the
United States and good for
Mexico.
So it's good that, despite the
negative opinion
in Mexico that makes it very,
very difficult
for this administration to move
on, that they
keep moving on with their
relationship.
That's...
(CROSSTALK)
ANTONIO MORA: Roger, do you
agree that it's
just a bump in the road, or is
this something
more serious?
ROGER NORIEGA: Well,
unfortunately, I think
Pena Nieto was in a very weak
position in
his political party.
And the economy is dead in the
water.
Oil prices have caused deficits
to go up.
The wrong kinds of economic
policies and tax
policies at home there in Mexico
are sort
of stifling its own
productivity.
So, those are the sorts of
things that we
should be working with, with our
partners
in Mexico to overcome, and, for
that matter,
Canada, too, as part of this
great NAFTA opportunity
that serves all of our
interests.
Unfortunately, this kind of
confrontational
approach and this insistence
that Mexico's
going to pay for the wall
actually weakens
the position of that responsible
center in
Mexico that wants to cooperate
more with us.
And you have people waiting in
the wings,
far left wings, by the way, who
are anti-American,
who are populists, who do not
believe in NAFTA
either...
ANTONIO MORA: You're talking
about Lopez Obrador.
ROGER NORIEGA: Lopez Obrador in
particular.
And, quite frankly...
ANTONIO MORA: So, you're worried
that Lopez
Obrador could win an election
and be the Mexican
Hugo Chavez?
ROGER NORIEGA: His polls are
going up.
And if we think Venezuela is a
mess where
it is, let's see a failed state
on the U.S.
border.
ANTONIO MORA: And what about
this back-and-forth
today on the tariffs, on Mexican
imports,
which they seem to have backed
off a little
bit?
But the danger there, if that
happened, if
NAFTA goes away and they can
impose those
tariffs, do you think there's
any chance that
we could see a trade war between
Mexico and
the United States?
JAMES CARAFANO: Well, I think
it's very unlikely
that we're going to see a trade
war between
the United States and Mexico
because it's
in nobody's interest to see a
trade war.
Maybe this is a negotiating
tactic.
This is the guy that wrote "The
Art of the
Deal."
Maybe they said that.
And maybe the next thing they do
is turn around
and the Mexican president says,
well, that's
unacceptable.
And we say, OK, we make a
concession to you,
we're not going to do that.
And, all of a sudden, the
Mexican president
looks stronger.
So, where my optimism comes from
is the only
path forward for Mexico is
better security
on the border, a productive
trade relationship
with the United States, and a
cooperative
U.S.-Mexican regional approach
to dealing
with the regional issues which
are hurting
them and hurting us.
So, it's the only practical
course forward.
ANTONIO MORA: And that's not
just important
for Mexico.
It's important for the United
States.
And it's a huge trade partner of
ours.
We rely on them on
counterterrorism efforts,
counternarcotic efforts.
And millions of jobs are either
in whole or
partially dependent on trade
with Mexico in
the United States.
ROGER NORIEGA: Absolutely, 14
million jobs
on NAFTA in general, six million
just on trade
with Mexico.
And I'm sure Jim would agree
with me completely
that we want more cooperation
from Mexico
on illegal immigration, to
secure that border,
to fight drugs, and, for that
matter, create
the kind of economic dynamism
among our three
countries that will create jobs
for all of
our folks here in North America.
But you're not going to get more
of that with
this kind of confrontational
approach.
ANTONIO MORA: I only have 30
seconds left,
so I want you guys to get a
quick final word.
How do you think this is going
to play out?
(CROSSTALK)
JAMES CARAFANO: And I think
there's a joint
responsibility here with the
U.S. government
and the Mexican government to
address that
issue of the American people,
and both of
our governments together
convince them that
this plan, despite that is said
in the press
and everything else, that this
plan, if it
is followed through both on
security and trade,
at the end of the day, is going
to be good
for Mexico.
And that's, I think, a joint
responsibility
with the Trump and the Mexican
present administration.
So, they have got the work cut
out for them,
no question.
ANTONIO MORA: But with all this
confrontation?
ROGER NORIEGA: We need more
cooperation, more
understanding, more
communication in a mutual,
respectful way.
Look, my president is the
American president.
And I want him to succeed in
making that border
more secure and generating jobs
for us.
But we have to do it in a
cooperative way
with our natural partners.
ANTONIO MORA: An issue for an
awful lot of
people.
Roger Noriega, James Carafano,
very good to
you have both here.
ROGER NORIEGA: Thank you.
JAMES CARAFANO: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
director's
take on weaving together grief,
love and laughter
in the Oscar-nominated film
"Manchester By
the Sea"; and eight men who have
spent their
entire adult life behind bars.
But first: aging and living on
the edge of
a financial cliff.
Last week economics,
correspondent Paul Solman
brought you the story of
Elizabeth White,
who was once comfortably middle
class but
is now nearing traditional
retirement age
and struggling to make ends
meet.
Tonight, Paul looks at just how
common her
story has become.
It's part of our weekly series
Making Sense,
which airs Thursdays on the
"NewsHour."
ELIZABETH WHITE, Author,
"Fifty-Five, Unemployed
and Faking Normal": I would say
I feel optimistic,
generally.
PAUL SOLMAN:
Sixty-three-year-old Elizabeth
White has been severely
underemployed for
three years.
ELIZABETH WHITE: I had $750 left
to kind of
make it through the end of the
month.
I have done it on less.
PAUL SOLMAN: Deborah Burkholder
hasn't had
a full-time job since 2009.
DEBORAH BURKHOLDER, Job Seeker:
I don't have
enough to cover January bills if
nothing changes.
It's hard to predict what will
happen the
next month, you know, and
calculating how
many times do I have to go
through this until
I'm buried?
ELIZABETH WHITE: There is a
low-level stress
that you -- you know, that is
wearing.
PAUL SOLMAN: One way to manage,
airing out
anxiety in what White calls a
resilience circle
of financially fragile friends,
all formerly
middle class, all well past 50,
and all too
common these days, says
economist Teresa Ghilarducci.
TERESA GHILARDUCCI, The New
School for Social
Research: We're finding that
very well-educated
people, people who have done
everything right,
are behind, really behind.
And they are hoping they can
stay in the labor
market, but a word that's used
in other countries
that isn't used here is very apt
here.
The word is superannuated, That
You have kept
yourself going, but the labor
market employers
don't put the same value on your
experience
and your know-how and your
wisdom as you might've
hoped, or they have done in the
past.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the experience
can be a killer.
A Yale study found that just one
layoff in
a lifetime increases the odds of
a stroke
or heart attack by 40 percent.
But what if you're just worried
about maintaining
your standard of living?
TERESA GHILARDUCCI: My research
shows that
uncertainty about your income at
older ages
causes more depression, causes
more anxiety,
which could lead to more chronic
heart failure,
heart disease, does actually
mean shorter
lifespans.
PAUL SOLMAN: Thus, the
resilience circle,
as a way of reasserting some
measure of control.
ELIZABETH WHITE: There's a lot
around us to
make us feel bad.
There's a lot around us that
would say, oh,
this is all your fault, you
landed here, you're
a loser, you landed here.
So people can start
self-medicating.
They can start -- I mean, just a
lot of sort
of negative places that it can
take them.
MAN: If we take everything as
personal, that
that very thinking is going to
prevent us
from taking effective action and
from being
creative.
WOMAN: Coming and having these
conversations
always anchors me in a different
way, so that
I can tell myself a better
story.
PAUL SOLMAN: Though, of course,
emotional
support doesn't pay the bills.
ELIZABETH WHITE: I think a lot
of people who've
gotten pushed out of the work
force and are
in late 50s, early 60s are never
going to
have a traditional 9:00-5:00 W-2
job.
We're not going to be able to
have the lives
that we thought that we were
going to have,
and there's some mourning of
that.
PAUL SOLMAN: White hopes her new
self-published
book, "Fifty-Five, Unemployed
and Faking Normal,"
will prompt people to stop
faking and open
up.
She herself was inspired to go
public after
reading the "Atlantic" magazine
article "The
Secret Shame of the Middle
Class" about writer
Neal Gabler's financial
failures.
NEAL GABLER, Author/Journalist:
There are
so many people in trouble.
PAUL SOLMAN: Judy Woodruff
interviewed Gabler
when he came out about his
finances last summer.
NEAL GABLER: And it struck me
that talking
about our financial situation is
very much
like men not wanting to talk
about sexual
impotence.
It's just not something you do.
It's an embarrassment.
It's a shame.
It's a humiliation.
And financial problems are
exactly the same
thing.
You're humiliated.
You're ashamed.
You're embarrassed about telling
anyone that
you are suffering financial
difficulties.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now Gabler, like
Elizabeth White,
readily admits he could have
saved more, been
more frugal, but so could a lot
of us.
In 2015, fully 46 percent of
adults said they'd
have to borrow or pawn to come
up with $400
in an emergency.
Ed Wolff (ph) has studied the
growing rainy
day fund gap for years.
MAN: Today, the average family
has enough
financial reserves to keep going
for about
three weeks.
That's it.
PAUL SOLMAN: And reserves for
older age?
TERESA GHILARDUCCI: Over half of
people who
are working now and over 50 have
nothing for
retirement savings.
They will only have Social
Security to rely
on.
And our conception that the way
we can mitigate
the fact that people don't have
retirement
savings can be more work, or
working longer,
or just sort of staying in the
game for longer
is really a false hope.
And it's a false promise.
PAUL SOLMAN: Though seven in 10
Americans
say they plan to work as long as
possible,
who's going to hire them?
Elizabeth White doubts she will
ever have
the resources she once did, so
she's smalling
up.
ELIZABETH WHITE: So, smalling up
is really,
what do I value, and getting
really clear
on what that personally means
for you, and
then trying to figure out, how
can I have
pieces and elements of that?
PAUL SOLMAN: Like displaying
African-inspired
art left over from her failed
retail venture.
Tom McDonough's (ph) focus,
keeping fit and
healthy.
It's cheap to do, he says, but:
MAN: That doesn't make medical
insurance any
cheaper.
If anything, the financial
burden, it continues
to grow and there's nothing that
I can do
to prevent that from happening.
PAUL SOLMAN: Indeed, the longer
he hangs in
there, the further his resources
have to stretch.
Florie Liser is OK for now, but
her sister
and niece had to move in with
her two years
ago.
FLORIE LISER, Job Seeker: My
sister hasn't
worked in a number of years and
lost her home.
She's an aerospace engineer, for
goodness
sake.
She's the brilliant one in the
family.
And, so, for me to see her in
that place is
very tough.
What if things don't change for
her or for
my niece?
Then, does that mean that I'm
going to be
sort of responsible for putting
a roof over
their heads and all of this kind
of things?
WOMAN: Forever.
WOMAN: For forever.
FLORIE LISER: I mean, I just
don't know.
I don't want to think about
that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Elizabeth White's
bottom line?
Share your plight, pare back to
the basics,
and try to help those of us
still comfortable
to understand that there but for
the grace
of God.
ELIZABETH WHITE: We live in a
culture where
it's just delicious to shame and
blame.
We have what I call sometimes a
smugtocracy.
PAUL SOLMAN: The smugtocracy.
ELIZABETH WHITE: Smugtocracy.
You can decide that, you know,
you have done
very well, and you don't want
anything to
do with these people.
Well, I'm telling you, some of
them are in
your family.
You know them.
What I'm saying is, the numbers
are so big
here, that it's going to affect
everybody.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from
Washington, D.C.
ANTONIO MORA: It's award season
in Hollywood,
and one of the most highly
praised films of
the year, "Manchester by the
Sea," was nominated
for six Academy Awards this
week.
Its director, Kenneth Lonergan
was nominated
for two of them.
Jeffrey Brown spoke with him
recently at the
Atlantic Theater in New York.
This report is part of our
ongoing coverage
of awards for the 2016 movie
season, Beyond
the Red Carpet.
JEFFREY BROWN: In an early scene
in the film,
"Manchester by the Sea," Lee
Chandler learns
that his recently deceased
brother has named
him as his nephew's guardian,
and the weight
of the world comes crashing down
again.
CASEY AFFLECK, Actor: He can't
live with me.
I live in one room.
ACTOR: Well, but Joe has
provided for Patrick's
upkeep, food, clothes, et
cetera.
And the house the boat are owned
outright.
CASEY AFFLECK: I can't commute
from Boston
every day until he turns 18.
ACTOR: I think the idea was that
you would
relocate.
CASEY AFFLECK: Relocate to
where?
Here?
JEFFREY BROWN: As played by
Casey Affleck,
Lee is a lost, mostly silent man
at sea over
some hidden grief.
But, says director Kenneth
Lonergan, it's
more than that.
KENNETH LONERGAN, Director,
"Manchester by
the Sea": I don't see it as a
film about grief.
I see it as a film about love,
and about people
trying to help each other and
take care of
each other, as much as it's a
film about grief.
It is about grief, obviously,
but it's really
about someone who's trying to do
right by
his family, even though he's
ready to quit.
JEFFREY BROWN: The film's title
is also its
setting, a small coastal
Massachusetts fishing
village, a place Lee Chandler is
pulled back
to against his will.
Kenneth Lonergan wrote the
screenplay as well,
and says he worried at first how
he'd capture
the kind of trauma he himself
had never experienced.
ACTOR: Nobody can appreciate
what you have
been through.
And if you really feel you can't
take this
on, you know, that's your right.
KENNETH LONERGAN: You always
write about things
that are not exactly you, and
sometimes things
that are really far afield.
I think it's the emotional
content that tells
-- that's the acid test.
You know, you couldn't enjoy a
movie if you
weren't able to put yourself
into other people's
shoes, and you certainly
couldn't write or
direct a movie if you weren't
able to do that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And how do you do
that?
KENNETH LONERGAN: When it's
going well, you
don't have to think these things
through.
You just -- I pretend I'm him.
I pretend I'm the other people
in the room
with him.
And I -- then they start
talking, and I write
it down.
And when it's not going well, I
try to get
back to that place.
JEFFREY BROWN: But are you
writing the pauses,
the shuffles, the -- you know,
the moments
where it's so fraught, right?
KENNETH LONERGAN: Yes, most of
them, but not
all of them.
Like, the actors will come in,
and you discover
just as much in the set as you
do at your
desk.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lonergan first
made his name
as a playwright, with such works
as "This
Is Our Youth" and "Lobby Hero."
ACTRESS: I don't know what the
church's official
position is on adultery these
days.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Manchester" is
his third film.
His first, "You Can Count on
Me," set in Upstate
New York and dealing with a
different kind
of family drama, came out in
2000.
The second, "Margaret," set in
New York after
9/11, was a traumatic experience
for Lonergan
himself, after numerous disputes
with the
studio led to a very limited
release.
JEFFREY BROWN: With
"Manchester," Lonergan
again deals with loss and the
whole idea of
closure.
KENNETH LONERGAN: Which is a
really unpleasant
word to me, and I don't know
what it means.
And it's not that -- there are
many really
beautiful and inspiring stories
about people
overcoming incredible odds, much
worse than
the odds my characters face, and
coming out
the other end whole or stronger
or -- that's
the good side of it.
The bad side of it to me is the
obligation
to do so, like the failure to
recognize that
there are millions, billions of
people who
have suffered blows that they're
not going
to recover from.
JEFFREY BROWN: If that sounds
depressing,
well, it is.
But the film has gained much
positive attention
because of its powerful
performances and the
way it packs its emotional
punch, with parts
of the story told in flashbacks
to see the
characters in different, happier
times.
CASEY AFFLECK: This is the same
girl who was
over at the house?
ACTOR: No, that was Silvie and
this is Sandy.
And they don't know about each
other, so...
JEFFREY BROWN: There's also a
great deal of
humor and warmth, especially
between Lee and
his teenaged nephew.
CASEY AFFLECK: Do you actually
have sex with
these girls?
ACTOR: We don't just play
computer games.
CASEY AFFLECK: With both of
them?
ACTOR: Well, with Sandy's mom
here, it's sort
of strictly just, like, basement
business.
CASEY AFFLECK: What is it that
mean?
ACTOR: It means I'm working on
it.
KENNETH LONERGAN: People are
funny.
I mean, they just are.
And I think that doesn't go
away.
The world doesn't grieve when
you're grieving.
The world goes on about its
business.
You're having a good day and I'm
having a
bad one and vice versa.
And they could be very good and
very bad at
the same time.
And that's -- you multiply that
by seven billion
and you have one element of
human experience.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's an
interesting way of
looking at life, the world.
KENNETH LONERGAN: It's true.
But it's true.
You can't think for seven
billion people.
And you can't put yourself in
positions of
the seven billion people.
But you can certainly stretch a
little bit
and put yourself in a few
hundred other people's
place, I would hope.
JEFFREY BROWN: So then what's
the job of a
writer in that, when you think
about the world
that way?
KENNETH LONERGAN: One job that
you have is
to notice patterns that only you
notice.
A writer, a director or an actor
or any artist
or creative person is who is
re-representing
life through their work is, I
think, describing
the patterns that they see.
JEFFREY BROWN: In "Manchester By
the Sea,"
Lonergan knows he's fortunate to
be working
with great actors, include
Michelle Williams,
giving life to his words.
MICHELLE WILLIAMS, Actress: I
really kept
in touch with Joe.
It's been kind of weird for me
not seeing
Patrick.
CASEY AFFLECK: I knew that.
MICHELLE WILLIAMS: Oh, OK, I
didn't know.
CASEY AFFLECK: You could see him
if you want.
MICHELLE WILLIAMS: Could we ever
have lunch?
KENNETH LONERGAN: You have a
version in your
head that works.
And then the actors come, and
that's what
I would say would be...
JEFFREY BROWN: And they mess it
up or they
do it...
(LAUGHTER)
KENNETH LONERGAN: Well, if
they're not seeing
all the elements in the scene
that I can see,
then I will try to point them
out.
Once they understand the scene
at least as
well as I did, they then go much
further.
And they become the characters,
whereas I
only imagine the characters.
And when it's Casey and
Michelle, I really
expect and get, like, way more
than I -- than
I think that I put in.
And when you have people like
this, you're
-- sometimes, you just sit back
and watch
them go.
And that's just -- that is why
you become
a director, or why you become a
playwright
or a screenwriter, is to see
actors do that
with your -- with what you
imagined initially
in your little room some time
two or three
years ago.
And it's just beautiful.
JEFFREY BROWN: Kenneth Lonergan,
his film,
and three lead actors all
received Oscar nominations
this week, aiming toward the
February 26 awards
ceremony.
From New York, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series.
Tonight, we hear from inmates at
California's
San Quentin Prison who committed
crimes when
they were young and are serving
up to life
terms.
They're part of a weekly
discussion group
where they focus on
self-improvement through
discussion, education, and
counseling.
The program is part of a larger
collaboration
with the design firm IDEO and
the California
Department of Corrections to
develop prisons
that support the
transformational growth of
incarcerated young men.
MAN: I have been incarcerated
for first-degree
murder and robbery at the age of
17, and I
have been incarcerated for
almost 28 years.
MAN: I have been incarcerated
for the past
31 years.
I came here when I was 19 years
old.
MAN: At the age of 19, I
committed a robbery-murder
with two of my friends at the
time.
And I am sentenced to 25 years
to life for
that.
MAN: I committed two
second-degree murders
at the age of 19, and I was
sentenced to 30
to life, plus 11.
MAN: At the age of 18, I
committed first-degree
murder in commission of a
robbery, and was
sentenced to 25 years to life.
MAN: I committed a
robbery-murder at the age
of 18.
I was sentenced to 25 years to
life.
MAN: At the age of 16, I
committed my crime.
I handed my co-defendant a
loaded .38 special
pistol to commit a robbery, and
during the
process of that robbery, a man
was shot and
killed.
MAN: When I was 15, I committed
a crime of
first-degree murder, and I was
sentenced to
25 years to life in prison
QUESTION: What did it feel like
to receive
a life sentence at such a young
age?
MAN: When somebody asked me,
hey, you know
how long do you got, and I would
say, I'm
serving 25 years to life.
What they told me was that, just
get comfortable.
You are never going home.
MAN: My father was an alcoholic
that used
to abuse my mother.
MAN: My father was an alcoholic
that used
to abuse my mother.
Later, she married my
stepfather, who was
also physically abusive.
MAN: When I met my friend's
older brother
that was committing robberies, I
felt powerful
doing that, when I felt
powerless at home
to stop my father abusing me and
my mother.
MAN: I'm originally from Laos.
Actually, I was born in a
refugee camp.
I joined a gang at 12 years old.
MAN: I committed a gang-related
murder and
my mother and little brother was
killed in
retaliation.
MAN: My grandfather was killed,
brutally murdered
when I was 10 years old.
At that point, my innocence was
lost and I
begin to shut down.
MAN: Having a dad that was in
and out of prison,
that was selling drugs and just
introducing
me to a criminal lifestyle, that
was a big
part of it.
But I feel like a bigger part of
it was finding
out that, when I was born, he
denied me.
And I think that was one of the
main things
that led to my committing my
crime.
MAN: A big part of my story is
coming to San
Quentin.
San Quentin is a different
environment than
most prisons.
Being around men who were
telling their stories
allowed me to know that it was
OK to be vulnerable.
I hadn't talked about my crime
for almost
15 years.
MAN: After being incarcerated
for 27 years,
I was open and honest about the
murder that
I committed.
It was the looks of empathy, as
opposed to
looks of judgment, that created
the shift
in my mind-set.
MAN: When I first started, I
wasn't able to
talk about myself, because I was
too embarrassed
and too ashamed to express the
things that
I have done.
MAN: It was hard in a
higher-level prison
to shed some of that
masculinity, the ideas
of masculinity and what I should
be and how
a criminal should act.
And then you come to a place
like San Quentin,
and it's a culture shock.
MAN: I was wondering like,
what's in the water,
right, because the guys were so
super articulate
and well-spoken and showing much
insight into
themselves.
MAN: I started off with a
program called GRIP,
which stands for Granting Rage
in the Power.
It helped me develop emotional
intelligence
and cultivate the mindfulness.
MAN: What really keeps me
motivated is this
program called SQUIRES, where I
am able to
mentor the at-risk and neglected
youth.
When I see this
14--to-15-year-old telling
me his story and I see myself in
that kid,
it is easier for me to have that
conversation
with them.
QUESTION: Do you ever think that
you could
relapse into crime?
MAN: Well, based on the change
that I have
made now, there is no way that I
could find
myself relapsing in a crime.
I'm not blaming my past for the
traumatic
experience, for the crimes that
I committed.
But I do understand that it was
a contributing
factor to what I did, and I do
take total
responsibility for it.
MAN: Catching a case looks like
this.
I'm walking down the street, and
then, all
of a sudden, it just falls out
the sky in
my hand.
I made a choice to carry a
pistol.
I made a choice to commit harm
to another
person.
And that's the difference
between catching
a case and saying committed my
crime.
MAN: I was stuck at this point
where I only
committed a robbery, and I
didn't commit a
murder.
One of my co-defendants was the
actual one
who committed the murder.
A young man at the age of 19
lost his life
because of the actions that I
did.
QUESTION: Do you think about
that crime still?
MAN: Yes, definitely, most
definitely.
So, what I did when I was 15
years old, I
shattered a community.
I tore a family apart.
I was a taker, and I took a
life.
And so I do think about that
every time.
QUESTION: What would you tell
your dad about
your life today?
MAN: I would say, you know what,
thanks, pops,
for all that B.S. that you
instilled in me.
But I would tell him you know, I
get you.
Like, all that denying me, all
that irresponsibility,
I mean, you didn't know any
better.
And I would say, you know what,
I forgive
you.
QUESTION: What would you like to
tell somebody
at that same age about to commit
a violent...
MAN: You have value.
You have importance.
You matter in this world.
There is nothing that can come
between that
and yourself.
MAN: My name is Adnan (ph).
MAN: My name is Cleo (ph).
MAN: My name is Tommy Shakur
Ross (ph).
MAN: My name is Phillip Melendez
(ph).
MAN: My name is Miguel (ph).
MAN: My names is Charles Spence
(ph).
MAN: My name is Newton Pangthong
MAN: My name is Mike, and this
is my Brief
But Spectacular take.
MAN: Brief But Spectacular take.
MAN: This is my Brief But
Spectacular take
on doing time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That is
something.
And I hope a lot of people get
to watch it.
ANTONIO MORA: Powerful message.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
additional Brief
But Spectacular episodes on our
Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
ANTONIO MORA: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Antonio Mora.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're glad to
have you
with us.
And I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.